you
welcome to the second installment of the
C to assembly introduction to MIPS
memory is one of the three components of
a computer and it's the opponent that
stores the code and data for a program
while which the processor fetches and
loads and stores in order to get data in
and out of registers and to move
instructions into the processor for
execution memory is byte addressed
meaning that the indexes in memory are
all numbers of fights each byte
containing of course eight bits of data
or instruction in MIPS memory is word
aligned and big-endian word is the size
of an instruction in the processor this
is used aurorae fights depending on the
architecture for example uses for byte
words a 64-bit processor uses 8 5 words
typically the size of the word is
matched to the size of the
general-purpose registers weird
alignment means that every memory
address starts at a multiple of the word
size so in mips32 every memory access
has to start at a multiple of four
big-endian means that when you look at
the order of the bytes in the word the
most significant byte starts at the
smallest address in memory the most
significant byte being the bits that
contribute to the larger portion of the
value of the word alternatives to begin
the inning group little-endian advisee
as an example let's consider storing the
32-bit hexadecimal value shown here for
a 3 B 3 C 1 D into the memory add an
address starting at hexadecimal 1000
in a big endian architecture the first
fight of the word will be stored at the
smaller address a smaller address being
the starting address so here the first
byte is stored at the memory address in
the word zero thousand the first byte of
the word is for a in hexadecimal two
characters of the hexadecimal value is a
bite because each character of
hexadecimal is four bits also called a
nibble half of a byte
so here the hexadecimal values are
stored as you look at the memory from
smaller to larger in the order they
appear in the word so we have 4a address
1003 be at address 1001 and so forth in
a little endian architecture so here 1 D
is store that one and then the next
least significant fight to see it's
stored at 1001 then 3 be at 1002 and for
a 1000 let's consider an
how arrays are laid out in memory arrays
are put in memory in the order in which
the array elements appear here's an
integer array getting five elements
declared and see you've initialized to
these values 313 the address of a 0 is
the starting address of the array this
notation ampersand address of and C
language the address of the 0 index of
the array is the start of the array so
the 0 with value 313 appears in the word
starting at the address of the 0 at
index out here right
the next word of the array starts at
address at the address of the zeroeth
index + 4 4 + 4 is because in the C
language in a 32-bit architecture in the
C language the int type is a word sized
element which means it's 4 bytes
that start of the array a is in
hexadecimal one bill zero one zero zero
zero
I mean that the address of the zero
element of the array will be that number
one zero zero one zero zero zero so we
can replace our notation here with that
Goulet element start one zero zero one
zero zero zero zero
the next element starts at that number
plus four you can see that each
subsequent word start set or bytes
offset previous zero four eight c 0 now
the indian s of the architecture those
four bytes may appear in different order
within the word starting at the address
let's consider array index 0 epi address
1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
when we load and store the value there
we get 313 we inspect the contents of
memory and hexadecimal indian it's 0 0 0
0 1 3 9 where 139 in hexadecimal is
equivalent to 313 in decimal in a little
endian architecture these last nibbles
the last byte of word and big-endian is
swapped in the memory at by containing
the hexadecimal 3 9 would actually
appeared first at this is Ray Ray index
1 starting at address 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 in
the decimal content of 78 when you load
and store it would have a big-endian
representation of 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 e lndian
representation for e 0 0 0 0 index 2 is
similar
now we look at the hexadecimal of this
larger decimal number these pairs of
nibbles appears in the M comes down to
here a more significant part of
little-endian representation 9200 over
here is your lap here zero zeros on the
end swap so you can see how the big
endian and little endian are sort of
mirrors at each other but not exactly
and the last two elements in the US the
third and fourth indexes are legs who
are interesting here to see memory
instructions and maps are earth and
store word owed word to a register at
the office horse register this loads or
reads a word of data into the
destination register memory at the
memory address calculated by adding the
offset which is an immediate value to
the source register the store word
instruction will copy the word from the
source register out to memory at the
memory address located at the offset
plus the value read from the destination
register this type of a memory
addressing scheme is sometimes called
base plus offset where the basis for
register and the offset is the immediate
value that gets added to the register to
specify a constant address value you can
use a base register of dollar zero and
MIPS base plus offset is is relatively
efficient or the common programming
practice of incrementing through an
array here's an example of word word
store word instruction consider that the
registers have been allocated so that
the variables here declared as GH birth
and other s $1 s 2 and the base address
of a zero is in three and to calculate V
equals H plus a three
who would first do load word into a
temporary register the value located at
offset twelve which corresponds with
array index three this is an integer
array and so the array index of 3 is 12
fights from the start of the array 3
times 4 bytes forward so we add 12 bytes
to the base register address dollar s3
that stores the base address of the
array a now dollar t0 is equal to the
value of array a and we can add that
value array a3 to the register value of
H and s2 and store it into s1 level
language instruction is 8 4 equals 8
here we reread eighth he added to age
these two instructions are actually
redundant in another future video I'll
discuss about removing these redundant
instructions in order to save execution
time so the assignment of H + a3 and a4
is accomplished by doing a store word of
the calculated value of H + 83 out to
the index of 16 offset from the base
address s 3 again 16 is equal to 4 times
4 plus 16 bytes from the start of a the
location of a before here's another
example this time we're not going to
assume anything about register
allocation yet a 5 element array a again
and we're going to calculate the
salvation of a 0 plus a 1 plus a 2 plus
a 3 and store the results in the a 4 the
first thing to do is to get the address
of a the L a this drum is provided by
the assembler it is a pseudo instruction
and you may use it as for load address
it gets the address of the label a
associated with a variable into a
register s 3 s 3 will equal the address
of a now that we've got the address of a
the base address of a we can now access
elements of the array a by offsetting
from that base address so the first
thing to do is to get the value of a 0
we get the value of a 0 by adding 0 to
the base address ok you know to the base
address a base address
of a +0 it is the element a zero zero
the next load word instruction does a
similar thing but this time it's
accessing the four byte offset from the
base of a which is the 1s element are
they because each element is four bytes
as an int type is four bytes long
finally add dollar to Euro dollar to
zero dollar t1 adds the previously
loaded values of a0 and a1 into the
register to zero load the value of a2
from memory fit into the t1 register add
t1 into the previously computed value
that way so we're updating to zero by
adding a 2 to it that gives the 17 0 now
the summation of a 0 a 1 and a 2 and we
need the value of 83 we get that the
right hand side of question now that
we've got the right hand side of the
expression we can store it in the a for
using the store word instruction or the
calculated value in t0 ended with word
really now let's talk about C struct
struct your comp is a concept in the C
programming language for creating
complex structures here we have a
relevant very simple structure which
contains two integer types and be a
fraction type to store a numerator and
the denominator there a variable of the
type struct fraction is a fraction at
somewhere in memory storage for this F
variable is allocated the address of f
ampersand f of F is the numerator value
because it appears first
in the struct declaration word of F F +
4 contains the denominator again this is
because the integer types are 4 bytes so
they perfectly fit into the word aligned
memory addresses structures in memory
appear or are laid out in the order in
which they are declared greater field in
the denominator field or appear in this
order numerator and then denominators
remember now when we declare this
variable we don't know where in memory
it will sit but we do know that when we
access the F variable we can access the
numerator and accessing an F for the
address of F plus or can access the
denominator we don't know what the
values of the numerator and denominator
are when we declare in structure you
cannot assume by default that C
initializers variables anything so we
need to declare a variable is
uninitialized and you don't know
fabulous find a value to a structure by
using this dot notation F denominator
which dominate her field of F should be
set to 20 we can initialize the
numerator for example to 10 in the MIPS
assembly this would be equivalent to
having these instructions address the T
0 of F so team gia was the bases address
of that initialize a register t1 to be
20 and then store value of 20 thus
initializing the denominator field of
that to be 20 similarly initialize the
numerator field to 10th we put a 10 into
a register and then we store the
register containing the value 10 into
the offset 0 from the
dress of F here we have a five element
array from the floor and an instant
Tyler put lay out the array before or
after the struct here we showed the
array coming before the struct the array
starts at address 0 X 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
and the struct starts at address mu 1 0
0 1 0 0 1 for the first 5 words starting
at the address 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 belong to
the array a and the next two words in
memory belong to the struct path now
let's see how the compiler would
generate assembly code for the
instructions initializing the array a
and the struct app here I've rewritten
the previous page removing the
Declaration of the array and the struct
or and compressing the initialization of
this for the first 5 lines of the
assembly code here correspond with the F
listed Dominator field of 20 and the
numerator fields into 10 first
instruction loads the address of F into
a register second instruction
initializes the register to the value 20
and then the following instructions
stores that value 20 into the location
of the denominator field and the struct
which is 4 bytes offset from the
beginning of the structure the next
instruction initializes the t1 register
to 10 and then store word of that
register of turn out to the 0 offset
from F finish life is the numerator
fields to 10 following instructions
shown in blue are the same code from
before that summation of a 0 through a 3
storing in a a for the first step is to
load the address of a into a register
and then load the values of a 0 and a 1
after that add the values together
load unload in the value of a 2 into a
register and add that into the 0 that
were keeping Misawa have load in the
value of a 3 into a register you know I
remember a 3 is 3 times the element size
of the array which is 4 bytes offset
from the beginning add the value that we
just read from a 3 into the container
register and we've got the summation of
the 4 elements of the array store that
value out to the 16 byte offset from the
beginning of the array which corresponds
with the 4th index or rather a 4 that's
everything today I hope this has been
illuminating